.\"
.\" libexplain - a library of system-call-specific strerror replacements
.\" Copyright (C) 2012 Peter Miller
.\" Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
.\" or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) explain_filename_from_fildes
.TH explain_filename_from_fildes 3
.SH NAME
explain_filename_from_fildes \- obtain filename from file descriptor
.if require_index \{
.XX "explain_filename_from_fildes(3)" "obtain filename from file descriptor"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <libexplain/filename.h>
.sp 0.3
int explain_filename_from_fildes(int fildes, char *data, size_t data_size);
.sp 0.3
int explain_filename_from_stream(FILE *stream, char *data, size_t data_size);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \f[I]explain_filename_from_fildes\fP function may be used to
obtain the name of the file associated with the file descriptor.
.PP
The \f[I]explain_filename_from_stream\fP function may be used to
obtain the name of the file associated with a file stream.
.PP
The filename is returned in the array pointed to by \f[I]data\fP.
The filename will always be NUL terminated.
If the returned filename is longer than \f[I]data_size\fP, it will be silently
truncated; a size of at least (PATH_MAX + 1) is suggested.
.PP
On success, returns zero.
If the file name cannot be determined, returns \-1 (but does \f[B]not\fP
set \f[I]errno\fP.)
.SH COPYRIGHT
.so etc/version.so
.if n .ds C) (C)
.if t .ds C) \(co
libexplain version \*(v)
.br
Copyright \*(C) 2012 Peter Miller
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
