.\"
.\" libexplain - Explain errno values returned by libc functions
.\" Copyright (C) 2013 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
.\" Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
.\" option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Lesser
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) explain_fchownat_or_die
.TH explain_fchownat_or_die 3
.SH NAME
explain_fchownat_or_die \- change ownership of a file relative to a directory \
    and report errors
.if require_index \{
.XX "explain_fchownat_or_die(3)" \
    "change ownership of a file relative to a directory and report errors"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <libexplain/fchownat.h>
.sp 0.3
void explain_fchownat_or_die(int dirfd, const char *pathname, int owner,
int group, int flags);
.br
int explain_fchownat_on_error(int dirfd, const char *pathname, int owner,
int group, int flags);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \f[B]explain_fchownat_or_die\fP function is used to call the
\f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system call. On failure an explanation will be printed
to \f[I]stderr\fP, obtained from the \f[I]explain_fchownat\fP(3) function,
and then the process terminates by calling \f[CW]exit(EXIT_FAILURE)\fP.
.PP
The \f[B]explain_fchownat_on_error\fP function is used to call the
\f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system call. On failure an explanation will be printed
to \f[I]stderr\fP, obtained from the \f[I]explain_fchownat\fP(3) function,
but still returns to the caller.
.TP 8n
\f[I]dirfd\fP
The dirfd, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system call.
.TP 8n
\f[I]pathname\fP
The pathname, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system
call.
.TP 8n
\f[I]owner\fP
The owner, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system call.
.TP 8n
\f[I]group\fP
The group, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system call.
.TP 8n
\f[I]flags\fP
The flags, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system call.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH RETURN VALUE
The \f[B]explain_fchownat_or_die\fP function only returns on success, see
\f[I]fchownat\fP(2) for more information. On failure, prints an explanation
and exits, it does not return.
.PP
The \f[B]explain_fchownat_on_error\fP function always returns the value
return by the wrapped \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) system call.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLE
The \f[B]explain_fchownat_or_die\fP function is intended to be used in a
fashion similar to the following example:
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
explain_fchownat_or_die(dirfd, pathname, owner, group, flags);
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]fchownat\fP(2)
change ownership of a file relative to a directory
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchownat\fP(3)
explain \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]exit\fP(2)
terminate the calling process
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH COPYRIGHT
.so etc/version.so
.if n .ds C) (C)
.if t .ds C) \(co
libexplain version \*(v)
.br
Copyright \*(C) 2013 Peter Miller
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
