.\"
.\" libexplain - Explain errno values returned by libc functions
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, 2009, 2011 Peter Miller
.\" Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) explain_chmod_or_die
.cp 0  \" Solaris defaults to ''.cp 1'', sheesh.
.TH explain_chmod_or_die 3
.SH NAME
explain_chmod_or_die \- change permissions of a file and report errors
.if require_index \{
.XX "explain_chmod_or_die(3)" \
                                "change permissions of a file and report errors"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <libexplain/chmod.h>
.br
void explain_chmod_or_die(const char *pathname, int mode);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The explain_chmod_or_die function is used to call the
\f[I]chmod\fP(2) system call.  On failure an explanation wiil be printed
to stderr, obtained from \f[I]explain_chmod\fP(3), and the the
process terminates by calling \f[CW]exit(EXIT_FAILURE)\fP.
.PP
This function is intended to be used in a fashion similar to the
following example:
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
explain_chmod_or_die(pathname, mode);
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.TP 8n
\fIpathname\fP
The pathname, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]chmod\fP(2) system call.
.TP 8n
\fImode\fP
The mode, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]chmod\fP(2) system call.
.TP 8n
Returns:
This function only returns on success.
On failure, prints an explanation and exit(EXIT_FAILURE)s.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.so etc/version.so
.if n .ds C) (C)
.if t .ds C) \(co
libexplain version \*(v)
.br
Copyright \*(C) 2008 Peter Miller
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
