.\"
.\" libexplain - Explain errno values returned by libc functions
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, 2009, 2011 Peter Miller
.\" Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) explain_fopen_or_die
.cp 0  \" Solaris defaults to ''.cp 1'', sheesh.
.TH explain_fopen_or_die 3
.SH NAME
explain_fopen_or_die \- open file and report errors
.if require_index \{
.XX "explain_fopen_or_die(3)" "open file and report errors"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <libexplain/fopen.h>
.sp
FILE *explain_fopen_or_die(const char *pathname, const char *flags);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \f[B]explain_fopen_or_die\fP() function opens the file whose name
is the string pointed to by pathname and associates a stream with it.
See \f[I]fopen\fP(3) for more information.
.PP
This is a quick and simple way for programs to constitently report file
open errors in a consistent and detailed fahion.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Upon successful completion \f[B]explain_fopen_or_die\fP returns a
\f[I]FILE\fP pointer.
.PP
If an error occurs, \f[B]explain_fopen\fP will be called to explain
the error, which will be printed onto \f[I]stderr\fP, and then the
process will terminate by calling \f[CW]exit(EXIT_FAILURE)\fP.
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]fopen\fP(3)
stream open functions
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fopen\fP(3)
explain \f[I]fopen\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]exit\fP(2)
terminate the calling process
.SH COPYRIGHT
.so etc/version.so
.if n .ds C) (C)
.if t .ds C) \(co
libexplain version \*(v)
.br
Copyright \*(C) 2008 Peter Miller
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
