.\"
.\" libexplain - Explain errno values returned by libc functions
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2013 Peter Miller
.\" Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.cp 0  \" Solaris defaults to ''.cp 1'', sheesh.
.TH libexplain 3
.SH NAME
libexplain \- Explain errno values returned by libc functions
.if require_index \{
.XX "libexplain(3)" "Explain errno values returned by libc functions"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
cc ... \-lexplain;
.sp
#include <libexplain/libexplain.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
The libexplain library exists to give explanations of error reported by
system calls.  The error message returned by \f[I]strerror\fP(3) tend to
be quite cryptic.  By providing a specific error report for each system
call, a more detailed error message is possible, usually identifying and
describing the specific cause from amongst the numerous meanings each
\f[I]errno\fP value maps to.
.SS Race Condition
The explanation of the cause of an error is dependent on the environment
of the error to remain unchanged, so that when libexplain gets around to
looking for the cause, the cause is still there.  On a running system,
and particularly a multi\[hy]user system, this is not always possible.
.PP
If an incorrect explanation is provided,
it is possible that the cause is no longer present.
.SS Compiling
Assuming the library header files has been installed into \f[CW]/usr/include\fP,
and the library files have been installed into \f[CW]/usr/lib\fP,
compiling against libexplain requires no special \f[CW]\-I\fP options.
.PP
When linking your pograms, add \f[CW]\-lexplain\fP to the list of
libraries at the end of your link line.
.RS
.ft CW
cc \&... \-lexplain
.ft R
.RE
.PP
When you configure your package with GNU Autoconf,
you need the large file support macro
.RS
AC_SYS_LARGEFILE
.RE
.PP
If you aren't using GNU Autoconf, you will have to work out the needed
large file support requirements yourdelf.
.PP
There is a \f[I]pkg\[hy]config\fP(1) package for you to use, too:
.RS
CFLAGS="$CFLAGS `pkg\-config libexplain \-\-cflags`"
LIBS="$LIBS `pkg\-config libexplain \-\-libs`"
.RE
This can make figuring out the command line requirements
much easier.
.SS Environment Variable
The \f[CW]EXPLAIN_OPTIONS\fP environment variable may be used
to control some of the content in the messages.
Options are separated by comma (\[lq],\[rq]) characters.
.PP
There are three ways to set an option:
.TP 3m
1.
The form \[lq]\f[I]name\fP=\f[I]value\fP\[rq] may be used explicitly.
The values \[lq]true\[rq] and \[lq]false\[rq] are used for boolean options.
.TP 3m
2.
An option name alone is interpreted to mean \[lq]\f[I]name\fP=true\[rq].
.TP 3m
3.
The form \[lq]no\[hy]\f[I]name\fP\[rq] is interpreted to
mean \[lq]\f[I]name\fP=false\[rq].
.PP
The following options are available:
.TP 8n
debug
Additional debugging messages for libexplain developers.
Not generally useful to clients of the library.
.br
Default: false.
.TP 8n
extra\[hy]device\[hy]info
Additional information for block and character special devices is printed
when naming a file and its type.
.br
Default: true
.TP 8n
numeric\[hy]errno
This option includes the numeric \f[I]errno\fP value
in the message,
\f[I]e.g.\fP \[lq](2, ENOENT)\[rq] rather than \[lq](ENOENT)\[rq].
Disabling this option is generally of use in automated testing, to
prevent UNIX dialect differences from producing false negatives.
.br
Default: true
.TP 8n
dialect\[hy]specific
This controls the presence of explanatory text specific to a particular
UNIX dialect.
It also suppresses printing system specific maximums.
Disabling this option is generally of use in automated testing, to
prevent UNIX dialect differences from producing false negatives.
.br
Default: true.
.TP 8n
hanging\[hy]indent
This controls the hanging indent depth used for error message wrapping.
By default no hanging indent is used, but this can sometimes obfuscate
the end of one error message and the beginning of another.  A hanging
indent results in continuation lines starting with white spoace, similar
to RFC822 headers.  A value of 0 means no hanging indent (all lines
flush with left margin).  A common value to use is 4: it doesn't consume
to much of each line, and it is a clear indent.
The program may choose to override the environment variable using the
\f[I]explain_option_hanging_indent_set\fP(3) function.
The hanging indent is limited to 10% of the terminal width.
.br
Default: 0
.TP 8n
internal\[hy]strerror
This option controls the source of
system eror message texts.
If false, it uses \f[I]streror\P(3) for the text.
If true, it uses internal string for the text.
This is mostly of use for automated testing, to avoid false negatives
induced by inconsistencies across Unix implementations.
.br
Default: false.
.TP 8n
program\[hy]name
This option controls the inclusion of the program name at the
start of error messages, by
the explain_*_or_die
and explain_*_on_error
functions.
This helps users understand which command is throwing the error.
Disabling this option may be of some interest to script writers.
Program developers can use the \f[I]explain_program_name_set\fP(3)
function to set the name of the command, if they wish to override
the name that libexplain would otherwise obtain from the operating system.
Program developers can use the \f[I]explain_program_name_assemble\fP(3)
function to trump this option.
.br
Default: true.
.TP 8n
symbolic\[hy]mode\[hy]bits
This option controls how permission mode bits are represented in error messages.
Setting this option to true will cause symbolic names to be printed
(\f[I]e.g.\fP S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IROTH).
Setting this option to false will cause octal values to be printed
(\f[I]e.g.\fP 0644).
.br
Default: false.
.SH Supported System Calls
Each supported system call has its own \f[I]man\fP page.
.\" please keep the following list sorted
.\" ----------  A  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_accept\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]accept\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_accept_or_die\fP(3)
accept a connection on a socket and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_accept4\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]accept4\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_accept4_or_die\fP(3)
accept a connection on a socket and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_access\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]access\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_access_or_die\fP(3)
check permissions for a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acct\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]acct\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acct_or_die\fP(3)
process accounting control and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_from_text\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]acl_from_text\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_from_text_or_die\fP(3)
create an ACL from text and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_get_fd\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]acl_get_fd\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_get_fd_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]acl_get_fd\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_get_file\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]acl_get_file\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_get_file_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]acl_get_file\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_set_fd\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]acl_set_fd\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_set_fd_or_die\fP(3)
set an ACL by file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_set_file\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]acl_set_file\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_set_file_or_die\fP(3)
set an ACL by filename and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_to_text\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]acl_to_text\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_acl_to_text_or_die\fP(3)
convert an ACL to text and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_adjtime\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]adjtime\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_adjtime_or_die\fP(3)
smoothly tune kernel clock and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_adjtimex\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]adjtimex\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_adjtimex_or_die\fP(3)
tune kernel clock and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_asprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]asprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_asprintf_or_die\fP(3)
print to allocated string and report errors
.\" ----------  B  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_bind\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]bind\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_bind_or_die\fP(3)
bind a name to a socket and report errors
.\" ----------  C  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_calloc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]calloc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_calloc_or_die\fP(3)
Allocate and clear memory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chdir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]chdir\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chdir_or_die\fP(3)
change working directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chmod\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]chmod\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chmod_or_die\fP(3)
change permissions of a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chown\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]chown\fP errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chown_or_die\fP(3)
change ownership of a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chroot\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]chroot\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_chroot_or_die\fP(3)
change root directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_close\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]close\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_close_or_die\fP(3)
close a file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_closedir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]closedir\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_closedir_or_die\fP(3)
close a directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_connect\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]connect\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_connect_or_die\fP(3)
initiate a connection on a socket and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_creat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]creat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_creat_or_die\fP(3)
create and open a file and report errors
.\" ----------  D  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_dirfd\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]dirfd\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_dirfd_or_die\fP(3)
get directory stream file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_dup\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]dup\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_dup_or_die\fP(3)
duplicate a file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_dup2\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]dup2\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_dup2_or_die\fP(3)
duplicate a file descriptor and report errors
.\" ----------  E  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_endgrent\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]endgrent\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_endgrent_or_die\fP(3)
finish group file accesses and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_eventfd\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]eventfd\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_eventfd_or_die\fP(3)
create a file descriptor for event notification and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execlp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]execlp\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execlp_or_die\fP(3)
execute a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execv\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]execv\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execv_or_die\fP(3)
execute a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execve\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]execve\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execve_or_die\fP(3)
execute program and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execvp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]execvp\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_execvp_or_die\fP(3)
execute program and report errors
.\" ----------  F  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_exit\fP(3)
print an explanation of exit status before exiting
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchdir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fchdir\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchmod\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fchmod\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchmod_or_die\fP(3)
change permissions of an open file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchown\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fchown\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchown_or_die\fP(3)
change ownership of a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchownat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fchownat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fchownat_or_die\fP(3)
change ownership of a file relative to a directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fclose\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fclose\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fclose_or_die\fP(3)
close a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fcntl\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fcntl\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fcntl_or_die\fP(3)
Manipulate a file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fdopen\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fdopen\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fdopen_or_die\fP(3)
stream open function and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fdopendir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fdopendir\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fdopendir_or_die\fP(3)
open a directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_feof\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]feof\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_feof_or_die\fP(3)
check and reset stream status and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ferror\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ferror\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ferror_or_die\fP(3)
check stream status and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fflush\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fflush\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fflush_or_die\fP(3)
flush a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fgetc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fgetc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fgetc_or_die\fP(3)
input of characters and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fgetpos\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fgetpos\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fgetpos_or_die\fP(3)
reposition a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fgets\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fgets\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fgets_or_die\fP(3)
input of strings and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fileno\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fileno\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fileno_or_die\fP(3)
check and reset stream status and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_flock\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]flock\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_flock_or_die\fP(3)
apply or remove an advisory lock on an open file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fopen\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fopen\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fopen_or_die\fP(2)
open files and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fork\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fork\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fork_or_die\fP(3)
create a child process and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fpathconf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fpathconf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fpathconf_or_die\fP(3)
get configuration values for files and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fprintf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fpurge\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fpurge\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fpurge_or_die\fP(3)
purge a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fputc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fputc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fputc_or_die\fP(3)
output of characters and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fputs\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fputs\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fputs_or_die\fP(3)
write a string to a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fread\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fread\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fread_or_die\fP(3)
binary stream input and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_freopen\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]freopen\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_freopen_or_die\fP(3)
open files and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fseek\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fseek\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fseek_or_die\fP(3)
reposition a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fseeko\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fseeko\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fseeko_or_die\fP(3)
seek to or report file position and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fsetpos\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fsetpos\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fsetpos_or_die\fP(3)
reposition a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fstat\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstat_or_die\fP(3)
get file status and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstatat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fstatat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstatat_or_die\fP(3)
get file status relative to a directory file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstatfs\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fstatfs\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstatfs_or_die\fP(3)
get file system statistics and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstatvfs\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fstatvfs\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fstatvfs_or_die\fP(3)
get file system statistics and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fsync\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fsync\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fsync_or_die\fP(3)
synchronize a file's in\[hy]core state with storage device and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftell\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ftell\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftell_or_die\fP(3)
get stream position and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftello\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ftello\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftello_or_die\fP(3)
get stream position and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftime\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ftime\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftime_or_die\fP(3)
return date and time and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftruncate\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ftruncate\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ftruncate_or_die\fP(3)
truncate a file to a specified length and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimens\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]futimens\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimens_or_die\fP(3)
change file timestamps with nanosecond precision and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimes\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]futimes\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimes_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]futimes\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimesat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]futimesat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimesat_or_die\fP(3)
change timestamps of a file relative to a directory  and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fwrite\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]fwrite\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_fwrite_or_die\fP(3)
binary stream output and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimesat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]futimesat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_futimesat_or_die\fP(3)
change timestamps of a file relative to a directory  and report errors
.\" ----------  G  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getaddrinfo\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getaddrinfo\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getaddrinfo_or_die\fP(3)
network address and and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getc_or_die\fP(3)
input of characters and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getchar\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getchar\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getchar_or_die\fP(3)
input of characters and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getcwd\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getcwd\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getdomainname\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getdomainname\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getdomainname_or_die\fP(3)
get domain name and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getgrent\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getgrent\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getgrent_or_die\fP(3)
get group file entry and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getgrouplist\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getgrouplist\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getgrouplist_or_die\fP(3)
get list of groups to which a user belongs and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getgroups\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getgroups\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getgroups_or_die\fP(3)
get list of supplementary group IDs and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getcwd_or_die\fP(3)
Get current working directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gethostbyname\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]gethostbyname\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gethostbyname_or_die\fP(3)
get host address given host name and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gethostid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]gethostid\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gethostid_or_die\fP(3)
get the unique identifier of the current host and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gethostname\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]gethostname\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gethostname_or_die\fP(3)
get hostname and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpeername\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getpeername\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpeername_or_die\fP(3)
Execute\f[I]getpeername\fP(2) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpgid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getpgid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpgid_or_die\fP(3)
get process group and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpgrp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getpgrp\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpgrp_or_die\fP(3)
get process group and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpriority\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getpriority\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getpriority_or_die\fP(3)
get program scheduling priority and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getresgid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getresgid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getresgid_or_die\fP(3)
get real, effective and saved group IDs and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getresuid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getresuid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getresuid_or_die\fP(3)
get real, effective and saved user IDs and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getrlimit\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getrlimit\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getrlimit_or_die\fP(3)
get resource limits and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getrusage\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getrusage\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getrusage_or_die\fP(3)
get resource usage and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getsockname\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getsockname\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getsockname_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]getsockname\fP(2) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getsockopt\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getsockopt\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getsockopt_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]getsockopt\fP(2) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gettimeofday\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]gettimeofday\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_gettimeofday_or_die\fP(3)
get time and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getw\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]getw\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_getw_or_die\fP(3)
input a word (int) and report errors
.\" ----------  H  ---------------------------------------------------------
.\" ----------  I  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_iconv\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]iconv\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_iconv_or_die\fP(3)
perform character set conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_iconv_close\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]iconv_close\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_iconv_close_or_die\fP(3)
deallocate descriptor for character set conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_iconv_open\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]iconv_open\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_iconv_open_or_die\fP(3)
allocate descriptor for character set conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ioctl\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ioctl\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ioctl_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]ioctl\fP(2) and report errors
.\" ----------  J  ---------------------------------------------------------
.\" ----------  K  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_kill\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]kill\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_kill_or_die\fP(3)
send signal to a process and report errors
.\" ----------  L  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lchmod\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]lchmod\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lchmod_or_die\fP(3)
change permissions of a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lchown\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]lchown\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lchown_or_die\fP(3)
change ownership of a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lchownat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]lchownat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lchownat_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]lchownat\fP(2) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_link\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]link\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_link_or_die\fP(3)
make a new name for a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_linkat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]linkat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_linkat_or_die\fP(3)
create a file link relative to directory file descriptors and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_listen\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]listen\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_listen_or_die\fP(3)
listen for connections on a socket and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lseek\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]lseek\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lseek_or_die\fP(3)
reposition file offset and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lstat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]lstat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lstat_or_die\fP(3)
get file status and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lutimes\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]lutimes\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_lutimes_or_die\fP(3)
modify file timestamps and report errors
.\" ----------  M  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_malloc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]malloc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_malloc_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]malloc\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkdir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mkdir\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkdir_or_die\fP(3)
create directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkdtemp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mkdtemp\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkdtemp_or_die\fP(3)
create a unique temporary directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mknod\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mknod\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mknod_or_die\fP(3)
create a special or ordinary file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkostemp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mkostemp\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkostemp_or_die\fP(3)
create a unique temporary file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkstemp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mkstemp\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mkstemp_or_die\fP(3)
create a unique temporary file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mktemp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mktemp\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mktemp_or_die\fP(3)
make a unique temporary filename and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mmap\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mmap\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mmap_or_die\fP(3)
map file or device into memory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mount\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]mount\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_mount_or_die\fP(3)
mount file system and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_munmap\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]munmap\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_munmap_or_die\fP(3)
unmap a file or device from memory and report errors
.\" ----------  N  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_nanosleep\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]nanosleep\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_nanosleep_or_die\fP(3)
    high\[hy]resolution sleep and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_nice\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]nice\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_nice_or_die\fP(3)
change process priority and report errors
.\" ----------  O  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_open\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]open\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_open_or_die\fP(3)
open files and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_openat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]openat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_openat_or_die\fP(3)
open a file relative to a directory file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_opendir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]opendir\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_opendir_or_die\fP(3)
open a directory and report errors
.\" ----------  P  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pathconf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]pathconf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pathconf_or_die\fP(3)
get configuration values for files and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pclose\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]pclose\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pclose_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]pclose\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pipe\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]pipe\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pipe_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]pipe\fP(2) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pipe2\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]pipe2\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pipe2_or_die\fP(3)
create pipe and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_poll\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]poll\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_poll_or_die\fP(3)
wait for some event on a file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_popen\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]popen\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_popen_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]popen\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pread\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]pread\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pread_or_die\fP(3)
read from a file descriptor at a given offset and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_printf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]printf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_printf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ptrace\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ptrace\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ptrace_or_die\fP(3)
process trace and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]putc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putc_or_die\fP(3)
output of characters and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putchar\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]putchar\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putchar_or_die\fP(3)
output of characters and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putenv\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]putenv\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putenv_or_die\fP(3)
change or add an environment variable and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_puts\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]puts\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_puts_or_die\fP(3)
write a string and a trailing newline to stdout and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putw\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]putw\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_putw_or_die\fP(3)
output a word (int) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pwrite\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]pwrite\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_pwrite_or_die\fP(3)
write to a file descriptor at a given offset and report errors
.\" ----------  Q  ---------------------------------------------------------
.\" ----------  R  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_raise\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]raise\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_raise_or_die\fP(3)
send a signal to the caller and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_read\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]read\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_read_or_die\fP(3)
read from a file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_readdir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]readdir\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_readdir_or_die\fP(3)
read a directory and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_readlink\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]readlink\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_readlink_or_die\fP(3)
read value of a symbolic link and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_readv\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]readv\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_readv_or_die\fP(3)
read data into multiple buffers and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_realloc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]realloc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_realloc_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]realloc\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_realpath\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]realpath\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_realpath_or_die\fP(3)
return the canonicalized absolute pathname and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_rename\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]rename\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_rename_or_die\fP(3)
change the name or location of a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_rmdir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]rmdir\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_rmdir_or_die\fP(3)
delete a directory and report errors
.\" ----------  S  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_select\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]select\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_select_or_die\fP(3)
execute \f[I]select\fP(2) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setbuf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setbuf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setbuffer\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setbuffer\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setbuffer_or_die\fP(3)
stream buffering operations and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setbuf_or_die\fP(3)
set stream buffer and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setdomainname\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setdomainname\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setdomainname_or_die\fP(3)
set domain name and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setenv\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setenv\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setenv_or_die\fP(3)
change or add an environment variable and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setgid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setgid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setgid_or_die\fP(3)
set group identity and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setgrent\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setgrent\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setgrent_or_die\fP(3)
rewind to the start of the group database and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setgroups\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setgroups\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setgroups_or_die\fP(3)
get list of supplementary group IDs and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_sethostname\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]sethostname\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_sethostname_or_die\fP(3)
set hostname and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setlinebuf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setlinebuf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setlinebuf_or_die\fP(3)
stream buffering operations and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setpgid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setpgid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setpgid_or_die\fP(3)
set process group and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setpgrp\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setpgrp\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setpgrp_or_die\fP(3)
set process group and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setpriority\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setpriority\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setpriority_or_die\fP(3)
set program scheduling priority and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setregid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setregid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setregid_or_die\fP(3)
set real and/or effective group ID and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setreuid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setreuid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setreuid_or_die\fP(3)
set the real and effective user ID and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setresgid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setresgid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setresgid_or_die\fP(3)
set real, effective and saved group ID and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setresuid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setresuid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setresuid_or_die\fP(3)
set real, effective and saved user ID and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setreuid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setreuid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setreuid_or_die\fP(3)
set real and/or effective user ID and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setsid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setsid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setsid_or_die\fP(3)
creates a session and sets the process group ID and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setsockopt\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setsockopt\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setsockopt_or_die\fP(3)
execute \f[I]setsockopt\fP(2) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_settimeofday\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]settimeofday\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_settimeofday_or_die\fP(3)
sets system time and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setuid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setuid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setuid_or_die\fP(3)
set user identity and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setvbuf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]setvbuf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_setvbuf_or_die\fP(3)
stream buffering operations and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_shmat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]shmat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_shmat_or_die\fP(3)
shared memory attach and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_shmctl\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]shmctl\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_shmctl_or_die\fP(3)
shared memory control and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_signalfd\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]signalfd\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_signalfd_or_die\fP(3)
create a file descriptor for accepting signals and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_sleep\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]sleep\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_sleep_or_die\fP(3)
Sleep for the specified number of seconds and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_socket\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]socket\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_socket_or_die\fP(3)
create an endpoint for communication and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_socketpair\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]socketpair\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_socketpair_or_die\fP(3)
create a pair of connected sockets and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_sprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]sprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_sprintf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_stat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]stat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_statfs\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]statfs\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_statfs_or_die\fP(3)
get file system statistics and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_statvfs\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]statvfs\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_statvfs_or_die\fP(3)
get file system statistics and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_stime\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]stime\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_stime_or_die\fP(3)
set system time and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strcoll\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strcoll\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strcoll_or_die\fP(3)
compare two strings using the current locale and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strdup\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strdup\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strdup_or_die\fP(3)
duplicate a string and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strndup\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strndup\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strndup_or_die\fP(3)
duplicate a string and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtod\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strtod\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtod_or_die\fP(3)
convert string to floating\[hy]point number and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtof\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strtof\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtof_or_die\fP(3)
convert string to floating\[hy]point number and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtol\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strtol\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtol_or_die\fP(3)
convert a string to a long integer and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtold\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strtold\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtold_or_die\fP(3)
convert string to floating\[hy]point number and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtoll\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strtoll\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtoll_or_die\fP(3)
convert a string to a long long integer and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtoul\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strtoul\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtoul_or_die\fP(3)
convert a string to a long long integer and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtoull\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]strtoull\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_strtoull_or_die\fP(3)
convert a string to an unsigned long long integer and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_symlink\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]symlink\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_symlink_or_die\fP(3)
make a new name for a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_system\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]system\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_system_or_die\fP(3)
execute a shell command and report errors
.\" ----------  T  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcdrain\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tcdrain\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcdrain_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]tcdrain\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcflow\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tcflow\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcflow_or_die\fP(3)
Execute \f[I]tcflow\fP(3) and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcflush\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tcflush\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcflush_or_die\fP(3)
discard terminal data and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcgetattr\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tcgetattr\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcgetattr_or_die\fP(3)
get terminal parameters and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcsendbreak\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tcsendbreak\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcsendbreak_or_die\fP(3)
send terminal line break and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcsetattr\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tcsetattr\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tcsetattr_or_die\fP(3)
set terminal attributes and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_telldir\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]telldir\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_telldir_or_die\fP(3)
return current location in directory stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tempnam\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tempnam\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tempnam_or_die\fP(3)
create a name for a temporary file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_time\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]time\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_time_or_die\fP(3)
get time in seconds and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_timerfd_create\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]timerfd_create\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_timerfd_create_or_die\fP(3)
timers that notify via file descriptors and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tmpfile\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tmpfile\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tmpfile_or_die\fP(3)
create a temporary file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tmpnam\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]tmpnam\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_tmpnam_or_die\fP(3)
create a name for a temporary file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_truncate\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]truncate\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_truncate_or_die\fP(3)
truncate a file to a specified length and report errors
.\" ----------  U  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_usleep\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]usleep\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_usleep_or_die\fP(3)
suspend execution for microsecond intervals and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_uname\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]uname\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_uname_or_die\fP(3)
get name and information about current kernel and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ungetc\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ungetc\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ungetc_or_die\fP(3)
push a character back to a stream and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_unlink\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]unlink\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_unlink_or_die\fP(3)
delete a file and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_unsetenv\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]unsetenv\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_unsetenv_or_die\fP(3)
remove an environment variable and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ustat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]ustat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ustat_or_die\fP(3)
get file system statistics and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utime\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]utime\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utime_or_die\fP(3)
change file last access and modification times and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utimens\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]utimens\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utimens_or_die\fP(3)
change file last access and modification times and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utimensat\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]utimensat\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utimensat_or_die\fP(3)
change file timestamps with nanosecond precision and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utimes\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]utimes\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_utimes_or_die\fP(3)
change file last access and modification times and report errors
.\" ----------  V  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vasprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]vasprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vasprintf_or_die\fP(3)
print to allocated string and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vfork\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]vfork\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vfork_or_die\fP(3)
create a child process and block parent and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vfprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]vfprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vfprintf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]vprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vprintf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vsnprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]vsnprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vsnprintf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_snprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]snprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_snprintf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vsprintf\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]vsprintf\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_vsprintf_or_die\fP(3)
formatted output conversion and report errors
.\" ----------  W  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_wait\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]wait\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_wait_or_die\fP(3)
wait for process to change state and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_wait3\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]wait3\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_wait3_or_die\fP(3)
wait for process to change state and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_wait4\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]wait4\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_wait4_or_die\fP(3)
wait for process to change state and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_waitpid\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]waitpid\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_waitpid_or_die\fP(3)
wait for process to change state and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_write\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]write\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_write_or_die\fP(3)
write to a file descriptor and report errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_writev\fP(3)
Explain \f[I]writev\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_writev_or_die\fP(3)
write data from multiple buffers and report errors
.\" ----------  X  ---------------------------------------------------------
.\" ----------  Y  ---------------------------------------------------------
.\" ----------  Z  ---------------------------------------------------------
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.PP
There are plans for additional coverage.
This list is expected to expand in later releases of this library.
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]errno\fP(3)
number of last error
.TP 8n
\f[I]perror\fP(3)
print a system error message
.TP 8n
\f[I]strerror\fP(3)
return string describing error number
.SH COPYRIGHT
.so etc/version.so
.if n .ds C) (C)
.if t .ds C) \(co
libexplain version \*(v)
.br
Copyright \*(C) 2008 Peter Miller
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
