.\"
.\" libexplain - Explain errno values returned by libc functions
.\" Copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
.\" Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
.\" option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Lesser
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) explain_socketpair_or_die
.cp 0  \" Solaris defaults to ''.cp 1'', sheesh.
.TH explain_socketpair_or_die 3
.SH NAME
explain_socketpair_or_die \- create pair of connected sockets and report errors
.if require_index \{
.XX "explain_socketpair_or_die(3)" \
    "create a pair of connected sockets and report errors"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <libexplain/socketpair.h>
.sp 0.3
void explain_socketpair_or_die(int domain, int type, int protocol, int
*sv);
.br
int explain_socketpair_on_error(int domain, int type, int protocol, int
*sv);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \f[B]explain_socketpair_or_die\fP function is used to call the
\f[I]socketpair\fP(2) system call. On failure an explanation will be
printed to \f[I]stderr\fP, obtained from the \f[I]explain_socketpair\fP(3)
function, and then the process terminates by calling
\f[CW]exit(EXIT_FAILURE)\fP.
.PP
The \f[B]explain_socketpair_on_error\fP function is used to call the
\f[I]socketpair\fP(2) system call. On failure an explanation will be
printed to \f[I]stderr\fP, obtained from the \f[I]explain_socketpair\fP(3)
function, but still returns to the caller.
.TP 8n
\f[I]domain\fP
The domain, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]socketpair\fP(2) system
call.
.TP 8n
\f[I]type\fP
The type, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]socketpair\fP(2) system call.
.TP 8n
\f[I]protocol\fP
The protocol, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]socketpair\fP(2) system
call.
.TP 8n
\f[I]sv\fP
The sv, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]socketpair\fP(2) system call.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH RETURN VALUE
The \f[B]explain_socketpair_or_die\fP function only returns on success, see
\f[I]socketpair\fP(2) for more information. On failure, prints an
explanation and exits, it does not return.
.PP
The \f[B]explain_socketpair_on_error\fP function always returns the value
return by the wrapped \f[I]socketpair\fP(2) system call.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLE
The \f[B]explain_socketpair_or_die\fP function is intended to be used in a
fashion similar to the following example:
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
explain_socketpair_or_die(domain, type, protocol, sv);
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]socketpair\fP(2)
create a pair of connected sockets
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_socketpair\fP(3)
explain \f[I]socketpair\fP(2) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]exit\fP(2)
terminate the calling process
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH COPYRIGHT
.so etc/version.so
.if n .ds C) (C)
.if t .ds C) \(co
libexplain version \*(v)
.br
Copyright \*(C) 2010 Peter Miller
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et
