.\"
.\" libexplain - Explain errno values returned by libc functions
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, 2009, 2011 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at
.\" your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) explain_ferror_or_die
.cp 0  \" Solaris defaults to ''.cp 1'', sheesh.
.TH explain_ferror_or_die 3
.SH NAME
explain_ferror_or_die \- check stream status and report errors
.if require_index \{
.XX "explain_ferror_or_die(3)" \
    "check stream status and report errors"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <libexplain/ferror.h>
.sp 0.3
void explain_ferror_or_die(FILE *fp);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \f[B]explain_ferror_or_die\fP function
is used to call the \f[I]ferror\fP(3) system
call.  On failure an explanation will be
printed to \f[I]stderr\fP,
obtained from \f[I]explain_ferror\fP(3),
and then the process terminates
by calling \f[CW]exit(EXIT_FAILURE)\fP.
.PP
This function is intended to be used in a fashion
similar to the following example:
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
explain_ferror_or_die(fp);
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.PP
It is essential that this function cal be placed as close as
possible to the I/O code that has caused the problem, otherwise
intervening code could have altered the \f[I]errno\fP global
variable.
.TP 8n
\f[I]fp\fP
The fp, exactly as to be passed to the \f[I]ferror\fP(3) system call.
.TP 8n
Returns:
This function only returns on success.
On failure, prints an explanation and exits.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ferror\fP(3)
check stream status
.TP 8n
\f[I]explain_ferror\fP(3)
explain \f[I]ferror\fP(3) errors
.TP 8n
\f[I]exit\fP(2)
terminate the calling process
.\" ----------------------------------------------------
.SH COPYRIGHT
.so etc/version.so
.if n .ds C) (C)
.if t .ds C) \(co
libexplain version \*(v)
.br
Copyright \*(C) 2008 Peter Miller
